# How 18 Minutes Changed History: Texas, Mexico, and the U.S. Takeover
Mexico achieved independence after eleven years of long resistance when the Treaty of Cordoba was signed by Spain, formally recognizing Mexico’s sovereignty. The erstwhile Mexico was way bigger than today, which included parts of California and Central America.
# History of Texas
Culturally and politically, Texas has a rich and complex history as it was controlled by different regimes like  Spain, then briefly by France, before becoming part of Mexico.  The name Texas derives from ‘tyasha’, a word in the Caddoan language of the Hasinai, which means "friends" or "allies." The Spaniards were the first Europeans to claim Texas around the end of the 17th century CE
The growing prosperity of the American Republic and the belief that Texas was included in the purchase of Louisiana sparked jealousy among the Spaniards, prompting them to adopt a highly restrictive policy. They forbade any citizen of the United States from entering Spanish territory without a passport, which could only be obtained by individuals whose purpose was scientific exploration.  This confrontation was well expressed by Don Salee do, general of the Eastern Internal Provinces, who said that, 
___“ He had the power; he would stop even the birds from flying across the boundary line between the United States and Mexico.”___

When the Treaty of Louisiana was concluded between the French Republic and the United States, the latter claimed Texas as part of its new territory. Spain also claimed the eastern portion of Louisiana as part of Florida. The growing animosity between the two states was finally terminated by the Adam-Onis treaty negotiated on February 22, 1819. As per the treaty, Spain had to relinquish Florida to the United States, and the latter had to give up all claims to Texas. This treaty established the Sabine River as the boundary between the two. 
# Anglo-American Migration to Texas

When Texas became part of Mexico, its Population was estimated to be around 3,500 to 7,000, primarily Tejanos (Spanish-speaking Mexicans in Texas) and a smaller number of foreign settlers. The population of Texas was very sparse because the hostile Native American Tribes used the Spanish horses and French Rifles to raid Spanish settlements in Texas. Texas was known for its fertile soil as the two major rivers, Colorado and Brazos, deposited fine, fragmented soil along their courses. The early Anglo-American settlers believed that the vast tracts of land, fertile soil, and warm conditions were ideal for cash crop production like Cotton. Though the influx of Anglo-Americans started when Texas was under Spanish control, the rationale behind this influx is the sparse population of Texas and to create a buffer against illegal U.S. settlers, who were creating problems in East Texas. 
# Role of Empresario
An empresario was a land agent or land contractor. Who was granted land by the Mexican government in exchange for recruiting and settling colonists in the eastern areas of Coahuila y Tejas (present-day Texas) in the early 19th century. These individuals, often known as "land speculators," played a crucial role in the development and population of the region. 
In 1820, during the final year of Spain's rule over Mexico and Texas, Moses Austin secured a commission as an empresario, or settlement agent, tasked with bringing settlers to Texas. Unfortunately, Moses Austin passed away before realizing this endeavour, prompting his son, Stephen F. Austin, to take up his father's plans and continue the mission. For his services, he was to receive some 67,000 acres of land for each 200 families he introduced. He offered generous land grants and exemption from certain taxes to attract immigrants. Hundreds entered the country by land and water As a result, large influxes occurred between 1821 and 1836, when an estimated 38,000 new settlers from the United States were settled in Texas. 

The early immigrants lived with many indigents. The majority of the food was obtained through hunting, yet there are times when the family doesn't have even a single piece of bread. Men dressed mostly in buckskin, the women in auch fabrics. Gradually, the circumstances improved. Though slavery was not prominent in Texas when they were under Spanish rule but when Anglo-Americans arrived, they also brought with them the infamous tradition of slavery. The motive to bring slaves with them was primarily economic, as it was agreed that settlers could receive eighty acres of land for each enslaved person they brought to the colony, and using their labour, the settlers could scale their cotton plantation. Cotton was a very important crop in the early 19th century. It became a major driver of the global economy and was particularly significant in the Southern United States. 
The Mexican leaders were opposing slavery at that time, though the 1824 Mexican Federal Constitution did not address the issue of slavery. But the constitution of the state of Coahuila and Texas forbade slavery and set all slave children free at birth. This was not a happy outcome for the new settlers of Texas, as their entire plantation economy depended on this social evil. They appealed to their Tejano leaders about this issue, leading the federal government to pass a law that allowed the importation of slaves under a different term: "Practice of Indenture Servitude." Under this, a contract is signed between the enslaved person and their master, which technically made the slave free, but in exchange for this granted freedom, the enslaved person has to be indentured to their master for the rest of their life. So, the game of putting restrictions by the Mexican government on slavery and creating loopholes for the new settlers in Texas continued. They always suspicion of the Mexican government of the abolishment of slavery in the state of Coahuila and Texas, which ultimately became one of the causes of the Texas Revolution in 1835.
# Texas Revolution of 1835
Numerous reasons led to the Texas Revolution, but the event that marked the advent of this uprising was the dispute between the Mexican government and Edward Brothers, which history remembers as the Fredonian Rebellion. Haden Edward was appointed as empresario in the year 1825. The Mexican government commissioned him to settle the vast tracts of land at Nacogdoches(particularly in eastern Texas) to settle around 800 families. He demanded the documentation of land claims from existing inhabitants. The settlers who lacked documentation there land confiscated by Haden. This oppressive policy was witnessed by the Mexican government, which ultimately negated the empresario position of Haden. He then reacted by declaring the Republic of Fredonia with some settlers and native Indians. His brother, Benjamin Edward, held the position of commander in chief. The rebellion was curbed by the Mexican government in a short period, and they reacted with the law of 1830, which restricted further immigration, put an end to the importation of slaves, and taxes/tariffs were reimposed that further provoked the Anglo-American settlers "which planted the essential seeds for the emergence of the Texas Revolution." 
The three important events that pretty much sum up the entire Texas Revolution were the Battle of Gonzales, the Siege of the Alamo, and the Battle of San Jacinto resulted in the Liberation of Texas from Mexico. 
# Battle of Gonzales
In 1835, Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna (AKA Santa Anna), president of Mexico, declared himself the dictator. He was very much concerned about the Americanization of Texas by Anglo-Americans, so he ordered his military commander, Domingo de Ugartechea, to take back the cannons that were lent to the Anglo-American settlers of Gonzales as a defence against the Native tribes, but they refused to surrender the cannons. This led to a clash between the Mexican army and Texians across the Guadalupe River. Texians include the Anglo-American settlers and Tejanos (who were Mexican-born Texas residents). This battle culminated in the victory of the Texians.
# Siege of the Alamo
After the successful siege of Bexar (Now San Antonio), the Texians once again vanquished the Mexican army, and the hope of an independent Texas appeared close. Later on, the Texians captured a military garrison of Mexicans at the Alamo, but the control over the garrison was not prolonged, as the Mexicans took charge of the Alamo garrison after defeating the Texians in a 13-day-long battle. The siege cost the lives of all the Texian defenders stationed at the garrison, but this did not dampen the morale and hope of the Texians for the independent republic. 

`I call on you in the name of Liberty, patriotism, and everything dear to the American character, to come to our aid with all dispatch (speed)... VICTORY OR DEATH" – A plea made by William Travis, Texian commander at the Alamo  `
# Battle of San Jacinto
Following the Siege of the Alamo, the infamous ‘Goliad Massacre’ happened where around 350 Prisoners of war were killed under the command of General Jose de Urrea of Mexico. The Texians sought to reclaim the lost honour and transform their suffering into a final triumph at the Battle of San Jacinto. 
Santa Anna continued to chase down the unskilled Texian soldiers, and he was very confident about the Mexican victory, but one wrong move by him resulted in a deadly defeat of his army near the San Jacinto River. On the afternoon of 21st April 1836, Santa Anna and his soldiers were resting near the site of the San Jacinto River. The Texans declared a surprise attack on them. Soon, Sam Houston, the commander of Texians, defeated the Mexican forces led by Santa Anna at the battle near San Jacinto River that lasted only Eighteen Minutes. The Texans finally got independent and made their own Republic of Texas. Santa Anna’s nonchalant attitude, underestimation of Texians, and failure to secure his Military outpost led to their decisive defeat.
The hero of the new state, Sam Houston elected as the President. The new Texas witnessed rapid migration from the southern United States, increased dependence on Slave labour, and an increase in cotton production. Countries like Britain, France, and the United States recognized the new independent state. 
# Annexation of Texas: Officially added to the United States
Though Texas had declared itself an independent republic in 1836, its position remained fragile. After nearly a decade of self-rule and growing economic and political ties with the United States, Texas was formally annexed by the U.S. on December, 1845, becoming the 28th state. This move was welcomed by many Texans but strongly opposed by Mexico, which still considered Texas part of its territory. The annexation ultimately escalated tensions between the two nations and became one of the key triggers of the Mexican-American War in 1846.
